README.md, before:

# Terraform Testing ![status](https://git.sogyo.nl/abaars/mancala-terraform/badges/main/pipeline.svg?ignore_skipped=true)

# What is this project for?

This project is made by me as I discover how to work with terraform. Here, I will try to document my findings for myself and (possibly) those that come after me. I may have missed some details, for which I apologize.

# What does this project do?

It launches two virtual machines (Ubuntu 22.04) on Daan's VSphere instance. That's it, so far. The goal is to deploy my individual project (Minesweeper) onto it.

# What do you need to know to understand this project?

You need basic knowledge of Terraform, VSphere, and Gitlab CI/CD (including variables).

# What do the components in the project do?

Here, in the README, I will quickly summarize what each script does and what environment variables need to be set (and when). Within each file is documented what the specific pieces of code do.

## Gitlab-ci.yml

This YAML file takes care of the pipeline to validate and launch the vsphere cluster using Terraform. It contains three pipelines; one to generate an sshkey and stores it in a vault, one that plans and launches the VM's on Daan's kubernetes cluster, and one to destroy it.

### SSHkey creation

The first part of the pipeline creates a secure ssh key and sends it off to an Infisical vault. It consists of terraform-tk-validate, terraform-tk-plan, and terraform-tk-apply steps. These steps validate the terraform scripts, plan the changes to perform, and apply the changes respectively. The apply step needs manual activation in gitlab CI/CD pipelines.

The terraform script creates a random ssh key-pair with RSA encryption (4096 bits) and send the public and private keys to an Infisical vault under the keys `VM_KEY_PUBLIC` and `VM_KEY_PRIVATE` respectively.

This pipeline only runs with the environment variable `$GENERATE_TOKEN` set to true. Do not include this variable in the standard CI/CD variables. Instead, create a new pipeline where you enter the variable so it only applies to that run.

### Infrastructure construction

The second part of the pipeline creates the virtual machines and deploys them on the specified cluster. It consists of the terraform-vm-validate, terraform-vm-plan, and terraform-vm-apply steps. These steps validate the terraform scripts, plan the changes to perform, and apply the changes respectively. The apply step needs manual activation in gitlab CI/CD pipelines.

Since this does not rely on any environmental variables to trigger, it runs by default when a change is pushed/merged. It assumes you have an ssh key pair stored in an Infisical vault under the keys `VM_KEY_PUBLIC` and `VM_KEY_PRIVATE`. The state of your infrastructure is stored on gitlab using the built-in Terraform API (see `backend.tf` and [tutorial](https://spacelift.io/blog/gitlab-terraform-state))

In addition to launching the virtual machines, it will add the ip addresses of your virtual machines to your Infisical vault under the key `VM_IP_<number>` and assumes that those keys are not occupied upon creation.

### Infrastructure destruction

The third part of the pipeline destroys the existing virtual machines and removes the stored IP addresses from the Infisical vault. It consists of the terraform-vm-validate and terraform-vm-destroy steps. These steps validate the terraform scripts and destroy the existing infrastructure respectively. The apply step needs manual activation in gitlab CI/CD pipelines.

The destruction of the existing infrastructure will remove the terraform state files stored in gitlab (see `backend.tf`), but also removes the IP addresses from your Infisical vault. Other secrets stored in the vault are not affected.

This pipeline only runs with the environment variable `$DESTROY_ENABLED` set to true. Do not include this variable in the standard CI/CD variables. Instead, create a new pipeline where you enter the variable so it only applies to that run.

### Authentification through environment variables

You also need to pass on authentification for gitlab (to store the Terraform state), VSphere (to access your cluster), and Infisical (to access your VM password and IPs). You need the following environment variables with their respective values:

* **INFISICAL_CID** --> your Infisical Universal Auth client ID

* **INFISICAL_CS** --> your Infisical Universal Auth client secret

* **INFISICAL_PID** --> your Infisical project ID

* **VSPHERE_USER** --> your VSphere user name.

* **VSPHERE_PASSWORD** --> your VSphere password.

All variables must be **Masked and Hidden**.

## Terraform

### backend.tf

This script configures saving the state of the VM's launched by Terraform. Gitlab has a built-in API to store, read, destroy, etc. which we use. There are ways to store the statefiles in a different location though, if that is your wish.

### datasources.tf

This script collects the necessary data for Terraform to function. It contains the configuration to connect to the correct VSphere instance (the one on the farm), but also configures the network it attaches the VMs to and the Kubernetes instance it is hosted on. Finally, it also provided the Ubuntu image used to construct the VMs.

### dependencies.tf

This script lists and configures the required Terraform providers (VSphere, random, and Infisical).

### main.tf

This script brings the loose elements together. It creates a random password (which is not stored for security) and creates the VMs based on the set criteria (OS, guest user, resources, etc.).

### variables.tf

This script takes care of the variables used by Terraform. Most of these do not have a default, as they are set using the '-var' command-line flag by gitlab-ci.yml.

Commit message:

Added context in create_vms main.tf and added a link to the Minesweeper programme in the README

README.md, after:

# Terraform Testing ![status](https://git.sogyo.nl/abaars/mancala-terraform/badges/main/pipeline.svg?ignore_skipped=true)

# What is this project for?

This project is made by me as I discover how to work with terraform. Here, I will try to document my findings for myself and (possibly) those that come after me. I may have missed some details, for which I apologize.

# What does this project do?

It launches two virtual machines (Ubuntu 22.04) on Daan's VSphere instance. In addition, it saves the IP addresses and authentication securely in an Infisical vault. My [Minesweeper](https://git.sogyo.nl/abaars/rusty-minesweeper) individual project can be downloaded onto these virtual machines, but sadly a fully working deployment was not achieved within the timescope ([github](https://github.com/AlBaarS/rusty-minesweeper/tree/addAnsible) link for non-Sogyo users).

# What do you need to know to understand this project?

You need basic knowledge of Terraform, VSphere, and Gitlab CI/CD (including variables).

# What do the components in the project do?

Here, in the README, I will quickly summarize what each script does and what environment variables need to be set (and when). Within each file is documented what the specific pieces of code do.

## Gitlab-ci.yml

This YAML file takes care of the pipeline to validate and launch the vsphere cluster using Terraform. It contains three pipelines; one to generate an sshkey and stores it in a vault, one that plans and launches the VM's on Daan's kubernetes cluster, and one to destroy it.

### SSHkey creation

The first part of the pipeline creates a secure ssh key and sends it off to an Infisical vault. It consists of terraform-tk-validate, terraform-tk-plan, and terraform-tk-apply steps. These steps validate the terraform scripts, plan the changes to perform, and apply the changes respectively. The apply step needs manual activation in gitlab CI/CD pipelines.

The terraform script creates a random ssh key-pair with RSA encryption (4096 bits) and send the public and private keys to an Infisical vault under the keys `VM_KEY_PUBLIC` and `VM_KEY_PRIVATE` respectively.

This pipeline only runs with the environment variable `$GENERATE_TOKEN` set to true. Do not include this variable in the standard CI/CD variables. Instead, create a new pipeline where you enter the variable so it only applies to that run.

### Infrastructure construction

The second part of the pipeline creates the virtual machines and deploys them on the specified cluster. It consists of the terraform-vm-validate, terraform-vm-plan, and terraform-vm-apply steps. These steps validate the terraform scripts, plan the changes to perform, and apply the changes respectively. The apply step needs manual activation in gitlab CI/CD pipelines.

Since this does not rely on any environmental variables to trigger, it runs by default when a change is pushed/merged. It assumes you have an ssh key pair stored in an Infisical vault under the keys `VM_KEY_PUBLIC` and `VM_KEY_PRIVATE`. The state of your infrastructure is stored on gitlab using the built-in Terraform API (see `backend.tf` and [tutorial](https://spacelift.io/blog/gitlab-terraform-state))

In addition to launching the virtual machines, it will add the ip addresses of your virtual machines to your Infisical vault under the key `VM_IP_<number>` and assumes that those keys are not occupied upon creation.

### Infrastructure destruction

The third part of the pipeline destroys the existing virtual machines and removes the stored IP addresses from the Infisical vault. It consists of the terraform-vm-validate and terraform-vm-destroy steps. These steps validate the terraform scripts and destroy the existing infrastructure respectively. The apply step needs manual activation in gitlab CI/CD pipelines.

The destruction of the existing infrastructure will remove the terraform state files stored in gitlab (see `backend.tf`), but also removes the IP addresses from your Infisical vault. Other secrets stored in the vault are not affected.

This pipeline only runs with the environment variable `$DESTROY_ENABLED` set to true. Do not include this variable in the standard CI/CD variables. Instead, create a new pipeline where you enter the variable so it only applies to that run.

### Authentification through environment variables

You also need to pass on authentification for gitlab (to store the Terraform state), VSphere (to access your cluster), and Infisical (to access your VM password and IPs). You need the following environment variables with their respective values:

* **INFISICAL_CID** --> your Infisical Universal Auth client ID

* **INFISICAL_CS** --> your Infisical Universal Auth client secret

* **INFISICAL_PID** --> your Infisical project ID

* **VSPHERE_USER** --> your VSphere user name.

* **VSPHERE_PASSWORD** --> your VSphere password.

All variables must be **Masked and Hidden**.

## Terraform

### backend.tf

This script configures saving the state of the VM's launched by Terraform. Gitlab has a built-in API to store, read, destroy, etc. which we use. There are ways to store the statefiles in a different location though, if that is your wish.

### datasources.tf

This script collects the necessary data for Terraform to function. It contains the configuration to connect to the correct VSphere instance (the one on the farm), but also configures the network it attaches the VMs to and the Kubernetes instance it is hosted on. Finally, it also provided the Ubuntu image used to construct the VMs.

### dependencies.tf

This script lists and configures the required Terraform providers (VSphere, random, and Infisical).

### main.tf

This script brings the loose elements together. It creates a random password (which is not stored for security) and creates the VMs based on the set criteria (OS, guest user, resources, etc.).

### variables.tf

This script takes care of the variables used by Terraform. Most of these do not have a default, as they are set using the '-var' command-line flag by gitlab-ci.yml.
